# Self Supervised Machine Learning For Predicting Cancer Dependencies

In this study, two deep learning models named VAE-DeepDep and MAE-DeepDep were developed to improve the DeepDEP model to predict gene dependencies in cancer cells. The aim of this project is to predict gene dependency scores by creating models based on variational autoencoders(VAE) and masked autoencoders(MAE), using data from The Cancer Genome Atlas(TCGA), The Broad Institute’s Dependency Map(DepMap), and the Molecular Signature Database(MSigDB). These changes showed that VAE and MAE architectures can outperform traditional autoencoders in dimensionality reduction tasks. Using the most successful model, the dependency scores of TCGA tumors on 1298 selected genes were calculated. In addition, the introduction of an innovative CCL fine-tuning step further improved the performance of the model. In variational autoencoders, the effect of the β parameter, which controls the trade-off between accurately reconstructing the input data and regularizing the latent space, was tested with four different β values, and the results were analyzed. It was found that varying β values did not lead to significant differences in model performance. Furthermore, in dimensionality reduction tasks, the advantages and disadvantages of using different latent representations in variational autoencoders were investigated, but no significant performance differences were observed between these representations. For masked autoencoders, the effect of the mask ratio, which determines the proportion of input data that is masked during training, was tested using three different mask ratios. The results indicated that the optimal mask ratio was 0.75, but there was no significant difference compared to the lowest mask ratio of 0.25. The study also investigated the effects of variable learning rates on both VAE and MAE models and showed that extremely small and extremely large learning rates had a significant impact on performance. Paired t-test was performed to evaluate the performance difference between VAE-DeepDep and DeepDEP models and it was revealed that VAE-DeepDep model performed better in terms of prediction success. Furthermore, an analysis using input dropout revealed that the fingerprint data contributed the most to model performance. Finally, synthetic lethality analyses of four genes were conducted using the MutFingerprint-VAE-DeepDep model, providing insights into potential therapeutic targets.
